Some years ago,
The Watchtower  quoted a religion writer
who said: “We no longer see ourselves
“as ‘sinners’ in need of forgiveness.
“Maybe sin used to be a problem,
“but now we’ve outgrown that.
“So while the church has a solution
for the problem of sin,
it’s a non-problem
in the eyes of most Americans.”
Now, that statement was made
about 25 years ago,
and today many more people
around the world share that view.
What is sin?
How is it related to freedom?
And why is it still a problem
even for us as Christians?
In his letter to the Romans,
the apostle Paul discusses the power of sin
and how we can control it.
The Bible says
that all unrighteousness is sin,
and that includes anything
that disturbs our relationship with Jehovah.
Paul explains at Romans 5:12
that “through one man [Adam] sin
entered into the world
“and death through sin,
“and so death spread to all men
because they had all sinned.”
Then he adds in chapter 7:
“For I do not do the good that I wish,
but the bad that I do not wish
is what I practice.”
And if we’re honest, all of us have to admit
that the same has been true for us.
Sin is not just what we do
or what we don’t do.
The Insight  book explains
that it is also
a “governing principle  or force”
that operates inside of us.
And that’s a scary thought
when you think about it.
Paul describes in his letter sin as a “law”
that is trying to control our actions.
He calls it a “king” that gives orders
in different ways
to different persons at different times.
And these vivid analogies that Paul uses
are intended to help us understand
just how powerful,
how relentless, inherited sin really is.
That power quickly became evident
after Adam and Eve
were expelled from the garden of Eden.
In Genesis chapter 4,
when Jehovah accepted Abel’s sacrifice
but rejected Cain’s,
the Bible tells us that Cain
became ‘very angry and dejected.’
Now, Cain didn’t realize
that the intense feelings he was experiencing
were not merely the natural human emotions
he was created with.
It was the sin
that he inherited from his parents
that was trying to control him.
So Jehovah
immediately explained this to Cain.
He warned him of the potential consequences.
He said:
“Sin is crouching at the door, [Cain],
“and its craving is to dominate you;
but will you get the mastery over it?”
Sadly, as we know, Cain
did not listen to Jehovah
and he allowed that sin
to get control, or mastery, over him.
And eventually he killed his own brother.
Jesus said at John 8:34
that “every doer of sin is a slave of sin.”
There’s no escaping that.
We don’t outgrow this problem of sin
as we get older.
And we’re foolish to simply ignore it.
Sin is the worst kind of slavery
that humans have experienced.
Not only can it mislead us
into doing what’s bad,
but it can also prevent us
from doing what we know to be right
or from living up to
what we know we’re capable of
in God’s sight.
That brings to our mind
Paul’s painful admission
in Romans chapter 7.
You know it well.
But please turn in your Bibles
with me there now,
and let’s read his familiar words
together again there
in verses 21 through 24.
Who of us does not identify
with the daily struggle
that Paul describes here?
Verse 21 says:
“I find, then, this law in my case:
“When I wish to do what is right,
“what is bad is present with me.
“I really delight in the law of God
according to the man I am within,
“but I see in my body another law
“warring against the law of my mind
“and leading me captive to sin’s law
that is in my body.
“Miserable man that I am!
Who will rescue me
from the body undergoing this death?”
Now, by the time that Paul wrote this letter,
he had been in the truth for over 20 years.
He served as “an apostle to the nations”
for almost ten of those years,
and yet sin was still crouching at his door.
It was still trying to dominate him.
What weaknesses did Paul have to overcome?
Well, we don’t know for sure,
but he did write to Timothy once
that he had formerly been “an insolent man.”
And before his conversion,
he said he was extremely mad
at the Christians
and persecuted them.
Obviously, Paul learned to control his temper
after becoming a Christian,
but there were still times
when he struggled to control his feelings
and his words.
On one occasion, the Bible says
that “there was a sharp burst of anger”
between him
and his close companion, Barnabas.
As Paul says, on our own,
we are helpless
to control the sin inside of us,
and yet the situation is not hopeless.
Jesus promised that at John 8:36:
“If the Son sets you free,
you will be truly free.”
Let’s keep reading
in verse 25 of Romans chapter 7.
Paul concludes by saying:
“Thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord!
“So, then, with my mind
I myself am a slave to God’s law,
but with my flesh to sin’s law.”
Because he accepted
Jehovah’s arrangement for salvation,
Paul was set free from slavery to ‘King Sin’
and his sidekick ‘Death.’
What a release that was for Paul!
You can almost hear
the sigh of relief in those words.
Well, what sinful tendencies are you fighting
right now, brothers and sisters?
Is it envy, like Cain
or perhaps your temper, like Paul?
Or is there some other bad attitude or habit
that you just can’t seem to kick?
Well, don’t be discouraged.
Like Paul, we all have our battle with sin.
The solution to the problem of sin is this:
Put faith in the ransom,
and do your best to “keep walking by spirit.”
The ransom makes it possible for us
to serve Jehovah God with a clean conscience.
What a gift that is!
At Romans 8:2, Paul says:
“For the law of the spirit
that gives life in union with Christ Jesus
has set you free
from the law of sin and of death.”
What does it mean to walk in God’s spirit?
Well, it means
making steady spiritual advancement.
It does not mean
striving for spiritual perfection,
which is something we can’t do right now.
Day by day, to the best of our ability,
we try to walk, or live, our life
in accord with the leanings
of God’s holy spirit.
Sin is real; it’s serious.
It’s not just a made-up concept
to keep our behavior in check.
And it includes anything
that disturbs our relationship with God.
We all start out life as a slave of sin.
But with Jehovah’s help,
Paul says
that we can get free from its control
and keep sin from gaining the upper hand.
It’s a real privilege, brothers and sisters,
to be serving alongside
men and women like you
who are fighting that battle successfully
every day.
Please keep up the fight.
If possible, keep doing it more fully.
We can do this.
Let’s do it together.
By the end of Christ’s Thousand Year Reign,
Jesus will vanquish
‘King Sin’ once and for all time.
What a joy that will be!
We will then enjoy what Romans 8:21 says
is “the glorious freedom
of the [sons] of God.”
Imagine that we’ll never again
have to ask Jehovah
for forgiveness of our sins.
We’ll be able to say to Jehovah
every day like Jesus does:
“I always do the things pleasing to [you].”
What an incredible experience that will be!
I can’t wait.
That’s the way to true freedom.